♪
I need you to take that to
the lab and get it analyzed.
How does that work?
Come on, Jim. You can cut
the act. I know you're FBI.
I'm not asking you
to drink it.
I'm asking you to
analyze it.
What were you hoping
to find?
Thought I might've found
your helicopter.
There was hydraulic fluid
in your water sample.
I need the autopsy reports
from the Big Rock murders.
Take 'em.
Hey! You said it
was just a --
I think she's encountered
a dark spirit.
I know I did.
She was getting
into my head,
and she tried to take
some of my hair.
[Floorboards creak]
I think you'd be better off in
a women's shelter in Gallow.
I need a name.
-Is it all there?
-Every penny.
Now what do we do?
Stick to the plan.
[people moaning,
van shocks squeaking]
["Proud Mary"]
- ♪ And we're rollin'
- ♪ Rollin'
- ♪ Rollin', yeah
[person screams with delight]
[person grunting wildly]
- Yee-ha!
- Oh.
[moaning]
- ♪ Rollin' on the river
- ♪ Rollin' on the...
- Hey, where you going?
What about me?
♪
- ♪ Oh, I left a good job
in the city ♪
[horn honks]
♪ Workin' for the man
every night and day ♪
♪ And I never lost
one minute of sleepin' ♪
♪ Worryin' 'bout the way
things might have been ♪
♪ Big wheel keep on turnin'
- ♪ Turnin'
- ♪ Proud Mary
keep on burnin' ♪
- ♪ Burnin'
- ♪ Rollin', rollin'
- ♪ Yeah, all right
both: ♪ Rollin' on the river
- ♪ Rollin' now
- ♪ Rollin'
♪ Said we're rollin'
- ♪ Yeah
both: ♪ Rollin' on the river
- ♪ Move up
both: ♪ Do, do, do, do,
do, do, do, do ♪
♪ Do, do, do, do
♪
- ♪ Whoo, yeah
♪ All right
♪
♪ Cleaned a lot of plates
in Memphis, y'all ♪
♪ Pumped a lot of 'tane
down in New Orleans ♪
♪ But I never saw
the good side of the city ♪
♪ Till I hitched a ride
on the riverboat queen ♪
♪ Big wheel keep on turnin'
- ♪ Turnin'
- ♪ Proud Mary
keep on burnin' ♪
- ♪ Burnin'
both: ♪ Rollin'
♪ Rollin'
- ♪ Yeah
both: ♪ Rollin' on the river
- Y'all were supposed to be
holding a painting for me.
- I sold that one
five minutes ago.
- To who?
- [screaming]
[tires screeching]
both: ♪ Do, do, do, do,
do, do, do, do ♪
- ♪ All right
♪ Yeah
[unsettling music]
♪
[moody guitar music]
[rock music playing on radio]
♪
[indistinct chatter]
- Why is everyone
staring at us?
- It's not us. It's the badge.
♪
You seen Raymond Begay?
- This silver was made
by my grandpa.
He wore it on the Long Walk
of the Navajo.
- Raymond.
♪
[person laughs]
Hey! Stop! Stop!
Why are you running?
- Go get him, tiger.
[chuckles]
I'm too old for that.
- Stop running!
- Let me get a cherry, please.
- Hey! Stop!
- [laughing]
- [groans softly]
- Come here!
- Ah, shit.
- Leave me alone!
- God, stop!
Just stop!
[both panting]
You done?
I could do this all day.
- You two done screwing around?
Why'd you run, Raymond?
- I don't know.
I didn't do anything
since last time.
- Did you do any diving
before you were booted
out of the Navy?
- Minesweeper.
Detachment Alpha at Nhà Bè.
- You want to make
an honest buck today?
[indistinct chatter]
- Can you take this?
Thanks.
[indistinct chatter over PA]
Is everything okay?
- I got my period, Auntie.
- Oh.
I'm gonna send you home
with some napkins.
- Do I have to go home?
- What's wrong?
Have you told your father?
- Yeah. He just stood there.
He didn't know
what to say or what to do.
- He needs to make arrangements
for your Kinaaldá.
I'll talk to him.
- Actually, I was wondering...
- [breathing heavily]
Nothing!
- Try over there!
Nothing as much as a stabbing
over a case of beer
in 16 months.
Now we're dealing with a double
homicide and a bank heist
in a span of three weeks.
- You think they're related?
- No. Nothing to go on.
It doesn't feel right.
- Seems totally random...
nothing concrete.
- Yeah...
except the tire tracks
at the Growing Thunder house
matching the same ones
we found out at the desert
where the Mormons went missing.
Four-wheel drive.
- Tourists probably had
car trouble and hitched a ride.
- Car ran perfectly.
- How do you know?
We didn't find the keys.
- Hot-wired it.
What? I wasn't always a cop.
- [chuckles]
- Nothing!
- Keep looking.
- I'm getting tired.
- Well, maybe you shouldn't
have run around the desert
like some jackrabbit.
[water splashes]
[sighs]
I also got a witness in custody
who might shed some light
on things.
- Who? Where?
- Growing Thunder girl--
she's my house guest.
- She given up any intel?
- No, not yet.
But I got my deputy
working on it.
- Bernadette?
[water splashes]
- Uh-uh, my wife.
- Come in. Welcome.
Hi, Sally.
This is my niece Nanobah.
She's gonna be staying with us
for the next four days.
Is it okay
if she shares your room?
Nanobah's gonna be celebrating
her Kinaaldá.
- I don't know what that is.
- Don't worry. We'll teach you.
- [sighs] Nothing.
- Well, maybe
you missed something.
Take another lap around.
- Hell, no! When do I get paid?
- You'll get paid.
It's got to be there.
- Be my guest.
- Hey!
Provo PD called this morning!
They ran the plates!
Wilson Smith, age 40,
along with his wife, Karen,
age 36,
and their two children,
Lucy and Cassandra,
ages 12 and 9, are all
officially reported missing.
- You still think
this is all random?
- I, uh, came across this, too.
Found it in the trunk.
- What is it?
- It's a receipt from McGinnis'
trading post for a painting.
- So?
- Well, there's no painting
found in the car.
- Hmm.
Kidnapping or worse.
I need to sort this out
with the feds.
In the meantime,
you two follow up on this.
And try not to kill
each other, hmm?
I got enough on my plate.
- [sighs]
When do I get paid?
- You know I know
how to drive, right?
- Do you know
where you're going?
There's not a lot
of street signs around here.
- It's all coming back to me.
- Good, 'cause when you're out
on the call
and there's nothing around you
for hundreds
and hundreds of miles,
it's important to be able to
tell people where to find you.
Hey, Roderick.
- Whoa.
- Friend of yours?
- He works my horses for me.
- How many horses do you have?
- You can give it a rest, Chee.
I'm not good with small talk.
- Okay. I'm just trying
to pass the time.
I'll leave you alone.
- I own four, and I board two,
including Emma's mustang.
I got a great setup.
A trailer out on two acres,
clean well--
it's everything I want.
- I'd like to see it sometime.
- [chuckles]
Not unless you board a horse.
No one comes to my place.
- No one?
- I am the sun bearer.
[speaking Diné]
- Okay.
So no one's ever stepped foot
inside your trailer?
That's just weird.
- All that's around here
are a bunch of Sonny boys
who can't keep a job,
mooch off their mamas,
and try to get in my trailer
without even asking
about my clan.
I'm good with the horses,
thank you.
[bell rings]
- Damn it.
[cash register bell dings]
There we go.
- Morning, Lester.
- Hey.
If it isn't
the Leaphornettes...
[laughs] The Reservation's
dynamic background duo.
What can I do for you?
- Wondering if you could help
us out with something.
- Yeah, it's a receipt for one
of Wanda's ugly paintings.
- Do you remember
who you sold it to?
- Mm, a bunch of Mormons.
Cheerful as all get-out...
[chuckles]
Even more so
than the rest of 'em.
Gave a toy horse
to one of their kids.
- They drive
a Lincoln Continental,
by any chance?
- Yeah. Is everything okay?
- They went missing.
- Is there anything else
you can tell us?
- Yeah, a bilagáanaguy
came in not long after,
wanting that same painting,
asking for my wife,
which I've been meaning
to get to the bottom of.
- You have any description--
height, build, hair color?
- Just some white guy,
uh, mustache like
Catfish Hunter.
Otherwise, nothing special.
- Well, if you can think
of anything else, let us know.
- Yeah, and if you find out
anything else, you let me know.
- Thanks, Lester.
- All right, thank you.
All right.
Hey. [laughs]
Feeding the whole tribe,
are we, Father?
- Jesus made do
with five loaves and two fish.
I'll settle for a bag of rice.
[haunting music]
♪
- [speaking Diné]
- Oh. [speaking Diné]
[soft country music playing]
- Hey, Uncle Joe.
♪
- Oh, hi.
It's a full house.
- Nanobah got her period.
- Oh.
Well, why can't your brother--
- Because he can't.
We could use a little
celebration around here.
- Yeah, I have to go
to Flagstaff tomorrow.
- Okay.
Oh, and while you're there,
Nanobah needs a sash belt.
[refrigerator door opens]
- They drank all my RC.
♪
Anything else?
- Firewood.
[sighs] We could always use
more firewood.
- Mm, okay.
She say anything to you yet?
♪
- Leave your shirt.
I'll get the stain out.
- Okay.
Clumsy!
[dramatic
acoustic guitar music]
♪
[siren wailing]
[tires squealing]
[siren continues wailing]
[light tense music]
♪
[wailing stops]
Hey, Yazzie.
Nice truck.
- Bought and paid for,
if that's what you're asking.
- Can I see the registration?
♪
Sorry for the inconvenience.
[engine turning over]
[rock music playing on radio]
♪
[indistinct chatter]
[scattered laughter]
♪
- What's going on?
- Nothing. It's the badge.
♪
- [laughing]
- Hey, Wanda.
- Who's your new boyfriend?
- He's not my boyfriend.
- Don't take offense, darlin'.
Runaway Bernie ain't no prize.
- You selling overstock?
Making some money on the side?
- Is that a crime?
- Lester might not like it.
- I stopped caring about what
Lester likes a long time ago.
- Hmm.
Well, he's not a big fan
of your art either.
- You know, a Mormon family
bought one of your paintings,
then went missing.
- I don't possess
that kind of magic.
- Well, it's not them
we're curious about.
It's the, uh, white guy
that came in after
to buy the exact same canvas.
- My art is popular.
R.C. Gorman needs
to watch himself.
- This guy came to see you,
and he left upset.
- You two have something
going on?
- I don't like white men...
or cops.
Are we done here?
- Bye, Wanda.
[dramatic music]
- [sighs] She's lying.
- Yeah, I know.
♪
[indistinct chatter]
- Hmm.
Well, Lieutenant.
- High-pockets.
- You're late.
- Mm, I'm on Indian time.
- Well, I'd sit, but I have
a tee time at 4:00.
- Eh, if I would've known,
I would've brought you
some crumpets.
- It's golf.
- Oh.
What a waste of land.
- Well, beats a whole lot
of nothing.
So...
family of four just up
and disappears.
You got any explanation
for that?
- Not yet.
- Well, no bodies
means it's yours.
Anything changes,
it's still yours.
My crime sheet is full.
- I guess you'll be solving
that on the back nine, huh.
- Yep. Adiós, kemosabe.
- I need updates
on the Atcitty/Tso case.
- Well, that case is closed.
- What do you mean it's closed?
What do I tell the families?
- You tell 'em they can
retrieve the bodies.
I'll have 'em sent over
to our funeral home.
- These families have no means
of retrieving the bodies.
- Well, you're an officer
of the law, Leaphorn.
You can bring 'em back.
Otherwise, they'll be
turned over to the state.
[indistinct chatter]
- [taps stick]
- What is it, Grandma?
- No scratching.
You want to be ugly
and forsaken?
- "Forsaken"?
No, Grandmother.
I promise I'll do my best.
Is this fine enough?
- Finer.
- You're doing well, Nanobah.
["Working Class Hero"]
♪
- ♪ As soon as you're born,
they make you feel small ♪
♪
♪ By giving you no time
instead of it all ♪
♪
♪ Till the pain is so big,
you feel nothing at all ♪
♪
- Hey, brother.
- Good afternoon.
- What tribe are you?
- Navajo Nation.
[both speaking Diné]
Here's all the sashes.
- How much?
- ♪ A working-class hero
is something to be ♪
♪ If you want to be a hero,
well, just follow me ♪
♪
- [speaking Diné]
- Why are we here?
- I thought you
and I could start over.
- Okay, well, start over, then.
- I didn't like the way Wanda
took a shot at you back there.
You know, we're partners.
We've got to have
each other's backs.
- That's just Wanda
being Wanda.
Being awful is all she's got.
- And that doesn't bother you?
- Well, you got to have
thick skin around here.
- What if you don't?
- What is this place?
- This is my home.
It's where I grew up.
- Oh.
It's beautiful here.
- [chuckles] Yeah.
- Why did you leave?
- I didn't have a choice.
I love this place...
you know.
[scoffs]
My mom started dating
this real asshole.
One day,
he roughed her up, and...
she knocked him halfway
to Shiprock with a frying pan.
- [chuckles softly]
- Then a couple weeks later,
I showed up to school,
and none of the kids
would talk to me.
Came to find out it was
'cause someone did this.
- "Witch."
- The rumor spread
on the moccasin telegraph.
All her friends turned
their backs on her.
Do you know what it's like
to be a kid and...
comfort your mom
while she cries?
The next day, she packed up
the car, and we left.
She died among strangers.
She had
a thick skin, too, once.
- I'm sorry that happened
to you.
- I used to dream about
coming back here to find him,
finish what she started.
But someone beat me to it.
- Emma's niece
is having her Kinaaldá...
over at Leaphorn's.
You should, uh, stop by...
help out, tend to the fire.
- Will you be there?
- [chuckles]
If there's a ceremony
anywhere on the Rez,
I'm the first in line.
- Okay.
[telephone ringing]
- Hello?
- Hey.
I'm still here in Flagstaff.
- Did you pick up the belt?
- Of course.
And I got it from a Diné,
not a Pueblo.
- [laughs]
- Look, I need to spend
the night.
- Joe, I need you back here.
- Yeah, I-I know.
But they're releasing the
bodies to me in the morning.
I'm bringing 'em home, Emma.
[soft tense music]
♪
[up-tempo
acoustic guitar music]
♪
- I made it.
- I knew that you would.
The farther you run,
the longer life you will have.
♪
- Can I help
with the corn today?
- Of course.
[indistinct chatter]
[dramatic music]
- How much?
♪
[speaking Diné]
[indistinct chatter]
Helen.
- [speaking Diné]
- She was a wonderful girl.
Truly.
Father Tso?
Hello?
[somber music]
♪
[indistinct chatter]
[horse whinnying]
♪
- [speaking Diné]
[bluesy guitar music]
♪
- Help!
- Hello?
- We're down here!
all: Hello?
- Help us!
- We're down here!
- We're here!
- Please!
- I see you met
our houseguests.
- I don't understand.
- Insurance--
a necessary result
due to your negligence.
- Get us out.
- Please!
- Where's the new painting?
- The police are asking
about the one they were sold.
They found a receipt
in the car.
I didn't tell them anything,
I swear.
[suspenseful music]
- I trust you.
You're true to the cause.
That's a beautiful hair clip.
Where'd you get it?
- At the market.
- Can I see it?
♪
May I keep it?
- It's a family heirloom.
- You said you got it
at the market.
I know someone
who'd really like this.
Thank you, Wanda.
♪
- You're welcome.
- Make sure no one sees you
on the way out.
♪
- You think she'll rat?
- I don't know.
You know who to give this to,
just in case.
[bell rings]
- Mm-hmm.
- I'll take every last cord of
wood you got out there, Lester.
- Oh, well,
careful you don't bring
a black widow home with you.
They love that wood pile.
- Spider bite's
the last thing I need.
- Yeah.
- What do I owe you?
- Oh, man, it's for a ceremony.
It's on me.
- Oh, thank you.
You're a good man.
- Ah. It's hard, but I try.
- Yep.
- Listen, Joe, um...
okay, Joe,
I got something else for you.
- What is it?
- Uh...
[sighs] I need to be
very careful here, Joe.
I found this. Uh...
I'm not saying where,
but you need to take a look.
- Father Benjamin Tso,
Florence.
- Yeah, yeah.
Hosteen asked me to mail it.
I asked someone else
to do it, and--
[scoffs] That's all I have
to say on that subject.
- When's the last time
you saw Father Tso?
- He came in here
about an hour ago
asking me where you lived.
- What'd you tell him?
- I didn't tell him anything.
Listen, but he did find out
that you buried
his grandfather.
That's all I have to say
on the subject.
- Thank you, Lester.
- Mm-hmm.
- [speaking Diné]
- I'm sorry I'm late.
I forgot my sash.
How do I look?
- If I'm being honest,
it looks like you have
no idea what you're doing.
So what's his name?
- I don't know
what you're talking about.
- Is it Duwayne?
- Duwayne? Pshh.
[speaking Diné]
You know he brought me a potted
yucca plant on our second date.
And I have a policy--
no living things
put in containers.
- If not Duwayne, then who?
[car door opens]
- [speaking Diné]
- Hey.
Emma Leaphorn, Jim Chee.
- [speaking Diné]
Jim Chee.
It's nice to finally
put a face to that...
[imitating Joe] College-boy cop
I've heard so much about.
- Thanks for having me.
- Quit your gabbing.
Get to work, pretty boy.
[Bernadette chuckles]
- Careful, careful.
[indistinct chatter]
- Hey.
- Hi. You good?
Okay, perfect.
Chee, walk with me.
- How did you find this?
- McGinnis.
- Well, what does it say?
- It begs Father Benjamin
to come home,
says that his brother's up
to his old ways.
- Brother?
- Mm-hmm.
Thing is,
he never got the letter.
- Then what is he doing here?
- Need you two on the fire!
- Okay, comin'.
We're gonna find out.
[animals chattering]
- Thank you.
- For what?
- Inviting me.
- I think I want to apologize.
- I'm sorry. I think there's
something wrong with my ears.
- When you walked
into the station, I thought,
"Man, this boy
does not know how to act."
- Doesn't sound
like much of an apology.
- [chuckles]
I misjudged you...
a bit.
I'm sorry for that.
- Apology accepted.
- We're not as different
as I thought.
- How so?
- My parents handed me over
to the boarding school
when I was real young.
Yeah, at first,
it wasn't so bad.
Some of the other kids,
they'd protect me.
[sighs]
But it got worse and worse.
The first time I ran away,
I was 11.
I thought I could make it
out on the land.
Joe scooped me up,
and he had to bring me back,
and that's how we met.
- So Leaphorn arrested you?
I'm sitting here
with a hardened criminal.
- [chuckles]
Yeah.
The second time, I had gotten
a visit from one of the nuns.
My parents were sick...
Real sick.
I ran away again.
When I got home...
Our hogan had been shut in.
- A plague house.
[dramatic music]
♪
- Joe and Emma,
they helped set me up.
They took me in.
♪
Joe Junior was like
a little brother to me.
- You're lucky.
You found a new family.
♪
- Yeah.
[vehicle approaching]
♪
[truck door closes]
Father Tso,
it's good of you to stop by.
- I wanted to thank
Lieutenant Leaphorn
for burying my grandfather.
♪
- Father.
- I cannot thank you enough
for your kindness.
You are a blessing
to this community.
- Thank you, Father.
You are as well.
- I'm afraid I have, uh,
one more favor to ask.
Would you mind
taking one more trip
out to my grandfather's ranch?
You can show me
where he was buried.
- Are--are you okay?
- [whimpering]
- Sally!
- [panting]
- Yeah.
- [screaming]
♪
[screams in pain]
[breathing heavily]
- Bernadette, start the car.
♪
- [screaming]
- You'll be okay.
You're in good hands.
[engine turning over]
- Go.
- Drive!
- I will pray for her.
♪
- She's gonna be okay.
Hmm.
So, um, I don't think
you mentioned earlier
when you were telling me
about your family.
What's your clan?
[door opens]
- Is she all right?
- Yeah.
[door closes]
Hey.
- Hey.
[sighs, clears throat]
[dramatic music]
♪
[candies rattling]
- You and the baby
are going to be fine.
♪
[no audible dialogue]
[all whooping]
♪
[whooping continues, stops]
- [sighs]
Frank Nakai.
- What?
- That's the name she gave me.
Now, I did what you asked.
Now I want you
to do something for me.
- What's that?
- When Sally's well,
I want her and the baby
to stay here.
[indistinct chatter]
♪
- [mouthing words]
- [gasps, grunts]
♪
[grunts]
[coughs]
♪
On the next episode
of "Dark Winds"...
What do you want with us?
♪
Man: You come to me
seeking salvation.
It's never too late
for that.
I need to ask you
a couple of questions
about Frank Nakai.
You played Leaphorn
like a fiddle.
♪
[Grunts]
[Bullets clatter]
This is crazy.
♪
["You Got a Spell on Me"]
- Aah! Oh! Ugh!
- ♪ Leave home
in the morning, baby ♪
♪ Ugh!
♪ Ooh, all day long
♪ You know what?
♪ Cannot wait
till nighttime, baby ♪
♪ Ugh
♪ Like to get back home
♪ Baby